Agriculture
FINGER MILLET
KHARIF / MAY-JULY
Types of Varieties
Chemical Fertilizer
Types of Pests Diseases
General Information
It is known as finger millet, African finger millet, red millet and ragi, are the oldest food and first cereal grain used for domestic purpose. Finger millet is originally native to the Ethiopian highlands and was introduced into India approximately 4000 years ago. They can be grown in dry weather; can withstand severe drought conditions and adaptable to higher elevations. These are short duration, ready to harvest as little in 65 day and can be easily grown throughout the year. It is highly grown crops among all small millets. It is rich source of protein and minerals in comparison to all other cereals and millets. It contains important amino acids. It has the highest amount of calcium (344 mg) and potassium (408 mg). It is beneficial for individuals with low haemoglobin levels as it is great source of iron.
Climate
Temperature
20-34°C
Rainfall
100 cm
Sowing Temperature
30-34°C
Harvesting Temperature
20-30°C
Temperature
20-34°C
Rainfall
100 cm
Sowing Temperature
30-34°C
Harvesting Temperature
20-30°C
Temperature
20-34°C
Rainfall
100 cm
Sowing Temperature
30-34°C
Harvesting Temperature
20-30°C
Temperature
20-34°C
Rainfall
100 cm
Sowing Temperature
30-34°C
Harvesting Temperature
20-30°C
Soil
It can be grown on variety of soil ranging from rich loam to poor shallow upland soil with good oganic matter. Black soil with good drainage can also be considered for cultivation as this crop is sustainable to water logging to some extent. Finger millet grow best in soil having pH 4.5-8. Soil having water logging problem should not be used for cultivation of finger millet.
Popular Varieties With Their Yield
VL Mandua 101, VL Mandua 204, VL 124, VL 149 , VL 146, VL Mandua 315 (maturity in 105-115 days) and VL Mandua 324 (maturity in 105-135 days). KM-65, PES 176 for hill areas.
PES 400:
Ready to harvest in 98-102 days. It gives average yield of 8 qtl/acre. It is early maturing variety and it is resistant to blast.
PES 176:
Ready to harvest in 102-105 days. Gives average yield of 8-9 qtl/acre. Seeds are of brown color and it is resistant to blast.
KM-65:
Ready to harvest in 98-102 days. Gives average yield of 8-10 qtl/acre.
VL 315:
Ready to harvest in 105-115 days. It gives average yield of 10-11 qtl/acre. Tolerant to finger and neck blast.
VL 146:
Ready to harvest in 95-100 days. It gives average yield of 98-102 qtl/acre. This variety is resistant to blast.
VL 149:
Ready to harvest in 98-102 days. Gives average of 10-11 qtl/acre. Wide adaptation and earliness and resistant to blast.
VL 124:
Ready to harvest in 95-100 days. Average yield 10 qtl/acre. Good for seed as well for fodder.
Other state varieties:
VL Mandua- 352
: Applicable for cultivation for all states except Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra. Ready to harvest in 95 to 100 days. It gives average yield of 8-10 qtl/acre.
VR 708
: It is drought tolerant variety. Applicable for all states for cultivation.
Akshya
PES 110
PR 202
JNR 852
MR 374
Land Preparation
1) Cropping Pattern:
Crop rotation is very important in finger millet crop. It give high yield, also minimize use of chemical fertilizer and help to maintain fertility of soil. In north India, for finger millet crop rotation with gram, mustard, tobacco, barley, linseed is commonly followed.
2) Intercropping:
In Punjab, finger millet and soybeans are mixed together in 90:100 percent proportion by weight basis and sown is also practiced. Finger millet + soybean in kharif and oats in rabi is an ideal and remunerative cropping sequence for northern hilly region.
In rainfed crop, carry out ploughing operation in main field 2-3 times deeply to conserved moisture in soil. Before sowing secondary tillage with cultivator and multiple tooth hoe to prepare smooth seed bed is necessary. Before sowing do minor land smoothening operations, it helps in better in-situ moisture conservation. In Uttaranchal where frequent ploughing operations are difficult to carry out effective digging and turning of soil, removing perennial weeds, land smoothening, providing inward slope with a shallow drain helps in taking out excess rain water.
Sowing
Time of sowing
In region of high rainfall, it can be cultivated on well-drained soil as transplanted crop. It can be grown as rainfed as well as irrigated conditions. It is grown in all cropping seasons in different parts of country. More than 90% of area is under rainfed conditions, grown during kharif season. In Uttaranchal it normally grown in June.
Spacing
Higher or lower yield than optimum population will lower down the yield. For optimum population, use spacing of 25x15 cm (25 cm between row and 15 cm plant to plant distance)
Sowing Depth
seed should not be sown less than 3-4 cm deep.
Method of sowing
Sowing can be done manually by:
Broadcasting
Line sowing
Drilling
Transplantation in field
Seed
Seed Rate
In order to get higher yield, a plant population of 1.6-2 lakh per acre is optimum and seed rate of 4 kg/acre for sowing in main field. Maintain optimum plant population in field by doing gap filling and thinning operation in field. After 20-27 days of sowing, when plants are established in field, thinning operation means removing of excess seedling is necessary. Similarly, where ever plant population is not uniform, gap filling with 20-25 days seedlings should be used.
Seed Treatment
Soak seed in water (one litre water for every kg of seeds) for 6 hours. Drain the water and tightly tied the seeds in wet cloth bag for two days. After two days remove seeds from wet cloth bag, they will show some sign of germination. Dry them in shade for two days. Use such seeds for sowing purpose. Treating seeds with Azospirillum brasilense (N fixing bacterium) and Aspergillus awamori (P solubilizing fungus)@25 gm/kg seed is beneficial. If seed treatment with chemicals is to be carried out then, complete chemical seed treatment first and then go for bio chemicals seed treatment before sowing of seeds.
Use any one fungicides from below
Fungicide/insecticide name
Quantity (Dosage per kg seed)
Thiram
4 gm
Captan
4 gm
Carbendazim
2 gm
Transplantation in Field
In areas of adequate moisture, transplantation method is adopted. It gives higher yield compared to direct seeded crop. Transplanted crops do not lodges during heavy rains.
Transplantation method:
Sow seeds in well prepared nursery in month of May-June. About 2 kg seeds are required to give enough seedlings to transplant 1 acre of land. For transplantation purpose use three to four weeks old seedlings. Before pulling the seedling, nursery should be irrigated. Prepare slurry with 2 packets 300 gm/acre of Azospirillum inoculant in 40 Ltr of water and dip the root portion of the seedlings in the solution for 15-30 min and transplant. Transplant two seedlings/hill at distance of 25x8 cm or 25x10 cm and at depth of 2-3 cm. On third day after transplantation irrigate the field. In absence of timely rain, irrigate the transplanted field regularly till seedlings are well established.
Fertilizer
Fertilizer Requirement (kg/acre)
UREA
SSP
MURIATE OF POTASH
ZINC
52
80
14
#
Nutrient value (kg/acre)
NITROGEN
PHOSPHORUS
POTASH
25
12
12
Apply 5-10 ton of Farm yard manure or well decomposed cow dung one month before sowing. Finger millets respond well to fertilizer application specifically to Nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizer. Do soil test to know exact requirement of fertilizer of your soil. If soil test value are not available, for rainfed crop, apply 60:30:20 of N:P:K. Apply full dose of P, K and half dose of N at time sowing. Remaining half dose of N to be applied in two to three splits (after 30 and 50days of sowing) depending upon moisture availability.
Weed Control
In initial stage of crop, weed control is necessary to obtained good crop growth along with good yield. In line sown crop 2-3 inter-culture operations and one hand weeding is necessary.
For effective weed control take Spray of pre-emergence weedicide like oxyfluorfen @1.25kg/acre or Isoproturon@400gm/acre. Spray, 2-4-D sodium salt@250gm/acre as post-emergent spray around 20-25 days after sowing for effective control of weeds.
Irrigation
As finger millet is rainy season crop it does not required irrigation.  But at stage of tillering and flowering, if rain stops for long period  then irrigation is necessary for good plant growth along with good  yield. Prepared furrows and ridges for irrigation purpose, it serves  dual purpose of irrigation and drainage. This crop cannot withstand in  waterlogged condition, therefor care should be taken for complete  removal of excess water.
No. of irrigation
Irrigation Interval
1st irrigation
Apply immediately after sowing
2nd irrigation
Apply on 3rd day after sowing
3rd irrigation
On 7th day after sowing
4th irrigation
Apply 12th day of sowing
5th irrigation
Apply 18th day of sowing
Plant protection
Pest and their control
Army and cutworm:
Appear in early stage of crop.  Caterpillar cut base of plant in early stage of crop. They are active  during night and hide in cracks and under stone during day time. They  are cyclic in nature
Control:
To control cutworm eggs, release  Trichogramma parasitoid weekly once for 3 weeks continuously. When the  symptoms are noticed take dusting of Malathion 5%@ 10 kg/acre or  Quinalphos 1.5%@250ml/acre. After harvesting remove weeds and stubbles.
Aphid:
They occurred throughout the growing period.  These are observed on the central leaf whorl and ears. In case of aphid  infestation yellowing of leaf is observed. Nymphs of aphid are round in  shape and reddish brown in color. Adults are yellow with green legs.
Control:
If infestation is observed to control take  spray of Methyl demeton 25EC@80ml/acre or Dimethoate 30 EC @200 ml/acre  mixed in 100Ltr of water.
White Stem borer
: Larva are found in lower stem  region and cause damage. They feed on roots and in severe infestations,  centre shoots dry up and become yellowish. Larva is milky white in color  with yellowish head while adult are dark brownish, white color on  forewings.
Control:
If infestation is observed, take spray of Carabaryl 50WP@1 kg/acre or Dimethoate 30 EC@200ml in 100 Ltr of water.
Ear head bug
: Adults attack crop on milky stage.  They feeds on emerging panicle and produces chaffy grains with silky  webs. Eggs are of shiny white color and found in cluster with orange  hairs. Caterpillars are of brown colors with yellow band and minute  hairs. Adults are of brownish color having fibrous forewings and  yellowish hind wings.
Control
: To attract adult moth place light traps  during day time. Place Pheromone trap @5 /acre at flowering stage until  panicle stage. In case of severe infestation spray Malathion 400ml or Carbaryl  600gm in 100 ltr water per acre.
Grass hopper:
Nymphs and adults feeds on leaves.  Nymphs are of whitish color with lines while adults are greenish brown  in colour with lines on body.
Control:
After harvesting remove all plant remains  and follow proper sanitation, cleanliness in the field. Do ploughing  after harvesting also in summer so that egg present in soil get exposed  to sun and thus get destroyed. At dry and moist conditions apply  Entomophthora grylli for grasshopper control. If infestation is observed  spray with carbaryl 50 WP@600 gm/acre.
Leaf folder
: Leaf folds longitudinally and larva remain inside. They scrap on leaves and thus white patches are observed on leaves. Female lays 200eggs on both side of leaf. Eggs are of yellowish white in color. Larva is of greenish yellow in color with brown or black head. Pupa are of dark brown in color and found inside folded leaf, while adults are whitish yellow or golden yellow.
Control:
Rotate crop with non-cereals crops. Keep field and area around field clean. Avoid closer spacing while sowing. Collect and destroyed infected leaf and plant parts away from fields. Spray Chlorpyriphos@2.5ml or Quinalphos@2.5ml or Acephate@1gm or Carbaryl@1gm or Cartap Hydrochloride@2gm/Ltr.
Diseases and their control
Blast:
In severe infestation plant gives a blasted  or burnt appearance, also lodging of crop is seen. It mostly occurred in  Kharif season, at all growth stage. If blast appeared in nursery stage  or at ear development stage then severe reduction in yield is observed.
Control:
Grow blast resistant varieties. Do seed  treatment with fungicide like carbendazim @2 gm/kg before sowing. If  symptoms are observed then immediately take spray of any of one  fungicides, Carbendazim@500 gm per acre. Second  and third sprays at flowering stage at 15 days interval to control neck  and finger infection. At 50% earhead emergence, take foliar spray with  Aureofungin sol@100 ppm, followed by a second spray after 10 days with  Mancozeb@400 gm/acre or Pseudomonas fluorescens@0.2%.
Mosaic
: Initially small chlorotic specks are observed  around 45 DAS in funnel leaves. Whole plant show yellow appearance in  severe infestation. Infected plants produce more of nodal branches and  unproductive tillers.
Control
: If symptoms are observed then uproot and  removed the infected plant and destroyed away from field. Take spray of  Methyl demeton @ 25EC 200 ml/acre. If required take second spray with  intervals of 20 days.
Harvesting
Generally crops matures in 120-135days, duration may vary depending upon variety use. Harvesting is done in two stages. Earheads are harvested with sickles and straw is cut close to ground. Earheads are heap and then drying is done in sun for three to four days. After good drying threshing is carried out. In some places whole plant along with earhead is cut, heaped and dry in sun for 2-3 days and then threshed.
Post-Harvest
Malting of finger millet is a traditional process followed in India and is used in infant foods and in milk thickener formulations, conveniently called ragi malt and is used in the preparation of milk beverages. A fermented drink or beer is also prepared from the grain in some parts of the country.
References
1.Punjab Agricultural University Ludhiana
2.Department of Agriculture
3.Indian Agricultural Research Instittute, New Delhi
4.Indian  Institute  of  Wheat and Barley  Research
5.Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare
Also Interested in?
Buy & Sell
Build Free Website
ASK EXPERT
Progressive Farmer