Agriculture
LONG MELON
RABI/ FEBRUARY-MARCH
TYPES OF VARIETIES
CHEMICAL FERTILIZER
PEST CONTROL
General Information
Long melon is popularly known as “Kakri”. It belongs to the family of cucurbitaceae and its botanical name is Cucumis melo. It is native to India. It has light green color fruits having smooth skin and white flesh. It is mainly eaten raw as a salad with salt and pepper. The fruit contains cooling effect therefore it is mainly eaten in summer season.
Soil
It is grown in variety of soil types ranging from sandy loam to heavy soil having good drainage system. The pH of soil 5.8-7.5 is good for crop cultivation.
Popular Varieties With Their Yield
Punjab longmelon-1:
Released in 1995. Early maturing variety. They have long vines, light green color stem and thin and long fruits. It gives an average yield of 86qtl/acre.
Other state varieties:
Karnal selection:
Prolific bearer. It has tender fruits which are light green in color, long in length and flesh is crispy with good flavor.
Arka sheetal:
Released from IIHR-3, Lucknow. It has medium long and green color fruits. Fruits having crispy flesh having good flavor. The crop gets mature in 90-110 days.
Land Preparation
Well prepared land is required for long melon cultivation. To bring the soil to fine tilth, 2-3 ploughings followed by harrowing are necessary.
Sowing
Time of sowing:
February-Mach month is appropriate for seed sowing.
Sowing depth:
Sowing depth of 2.5-4cm is used.
Spacing:
Use 200-250cm of spacing between the channels and 60-90cm of spacing between the hills. Two seeds are sown at one place for good stand.
Method of sowing:
Seeds are directly sown on bed or ridge.
Seed
Seed rate:
Use 1kg/acre of seeds.
Seed treatment:
Treatment with Benlate or Bavistin @2.5 gm/kg of seed is used to cure from soil borne diseases.
Fertilizer
Fertilizer Requirement (kg/acre)
UREA
SSP
MOP
90
125
35
Nutrient Requirement (kg/acre)
NITROGEN
P
2
O
5
K
2
O
40
20
20
Apply full dose of P2O5 and K2O and 1/3rd dose of Nitrogen at the time of sowing is applied 15cm away from the nursery beds. Remaining nitrogen is applied after one month of sowing.
Weed Control
Two shallow hoeing’s required before spreading of vines to control the weed.
Irrigation
Immediate irrigations after sowing are required. In summers, 4-5 irrigations are required and in rainy season depending upon requirement irrigation is done.
Plant protection
Pest and their control:
Aphid and Thrips:
They suck the sap from the leaves resulting in yellowing and drooping of leaves. Thrips results in curling of leaves, leaves become cup shaped or curved upward.
If infestation is observed in field, to control spray the crop with Thiamethoxam@5gm/15Ltr of water.
Beetles
: The symptoms are damage to flowers, leaves and stems.
If infestation is observed, spraying of Malathion@2ml/ ltr of water Carbaryl@2gm/ltr will help to get rid of beetles.
Fruit fly:
It is a serious pest found in longmelon. Females fly lay eggs below epidermis of young fruits. Later on maggots feed on pulp afterward fruits starts rotting and get drop.
Treatment: Foliar application of Neem oil @3.0%is given to cure the crop from fruit fly pest.
Disease and their control:
Powdery Mildew
: Patchy, White powdery growth appears on upper surface of leaves also on main stem of infected plant. It parasitizes the plant using it as a food source. In severe infestation it causes defoliation and premature fruit ripening.
If infestation is observed take Spray of water soluble Sulphur@20gm/10Ltr of water 2-3times with interval of 10 days.
Anthracnose:
Anthracnose affected foliage appears scorched appearance.
As a preventive measure, treat seed with Carbendazim@2gm/kg of seed. If infestation is observed in field, take spray of Mancozeb@2gm or Carbendazim@2.5gm/liter of water.
Downy mildew:
Caused by Pseudopernospora cubensis. Symtoms are mottling and purplish color spots are seen on lower surface of the leaves.
If infestation is observed, Dithane M-45 or Dithane Z-78 is used to get rid of this disease.
Fusarium wilt:
It affects the vascular tissues of the plant which result in immediate wilting.
Drenching with Captan or Hexocap @0.2-0.3% solution is used to get rid of fusarium wilt.
Cucurbit phyllody
: Symptoms are internodes shortening and stunted growth of plant. As a result crop does not bear fruits.
Application of Furadan@5 kg/acre at the time of sowing will helps to prevent from this disease. If infestation is observed, then spraying of Dimecron@0.05% at the interval of 10 days is done.
Harvesting
Fruits are ready to harvest in 60-70 days. Harvesting is mainly done when fruits attain full size and are tender. Harvesting is mainly done at the interval of 3-4 days in the peak season.
Seed production
Keep isolation distance of 1000m from other varieties of wild melon, muskmelon, snap melon and long melon. Remove disease infected plants from field. When fruits are mature i.e. they changes their color into dull. Then they are crushed with hands in fresh water and then separate seeds from pulp. Seeds which are settled in bottom are collected for seed purpose.
Also Interested in?
Buy & Sell
Build Free Website
ASK EXPERT
Progressive Farmer